---
layout: post
title: "Why a Science Club in a Science institute?"
author: Vatsal Trivedi
---

## Our Institute

UM-DAE CEBS was conceived to provide students with a sustainable academic and research environment within the country. The institute primarily offers a five-year integrated MSc program in four streams of basic sciences, namely Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Mathematics. Students are exposed to all four subjects in the first year, and specialized courses of a particular subject of their choice are taught second year onwards. It is a small community, and the typical strength of a class (second year onwards) is 8-9 students. We have a very limited number of in-house faculty members. Most of the courses are taught by either superannuated or currently active researchers, who have been or are a part of various research and academic institutes of Mumbai. These institutes include BARC, TIFR, IITB, HBCSE, ICT and NIRRH among others.

We have been very fortunate to be a part of an institute where researchers and academicians from leading institutes of the country share their knowledge with us. From what we have experienced in many of our courses, our teachers have tried to build our knowledge about the subject from the very basics. They encourage asking doubts, include historical as well as recent   developments of the subject, and give glimpses of how the knowledge can be applied in research. The academic structure of the institute makes it a very unique place in several aspects. Because of the small batch strength, teachers can pay attention to each student and can clarify their doubts. In the absence of a crowd, students can also be more comfortable with the teacher and the subject, and can interact without much hesitation.

Typically it is upon the instructor to decide how they want to cover the subject matter, though a general guideline of the courses does exist. This means that there is no compulsion to finish the syllabus, and everyone can try to clear up their doubts thoroughly before the class proceeds further. Since most professors come from different institutes and many of them are active researchers themselves, students also get to know the research environment of various fields and institutes in a better manner. Such an environment motivates students to come out of their comfort zones, study the subject matter in the most original manner and experience independent pursuit of knowledge. In this regard, an integrated community of peers can provide utmost help - discussions can bring novel ideas to the table and can offer new perspectives of looking at the problem.

## Childhood background

However, each student is different, with their own set of experiences. These include not just related to their academics during their stay at the centre, but a wider range of incidents since their childhood which have shaped their surroundings and outlook. Unless we acknowledge their background and the problems they face, and strengthen them, the opportunities as mentioned earlier do not have much meaning on their own and could go unused. Let us go beyond the standard facts associated with the academic structure of CEBS, and instead inspect the fabric from the students’ point of view.

Before joining the institute the students have already seen the environment of school and often coaching classes also. There, a lot of emphasis is given on solving questions to get the correct answer. Questions can serve as a great method to learn a concept, because then one can put together different ideas learnt in the chapter to find an answer to something. Many professors say that they ask their students to try solving as many questions as possible. So questions themselves may not be a problem. The problem is our over-reliance on them to evaluate everyone. Let us observe this in the case of language courses, where it is slightly more evident.

Suppose it is asked to translate a given sentence into another language. These sorts of questions are very common to ask in language exams. It'll definitely provide the student with an opportunity to practice the vocabulary, the correct use of prepositions and cases, and so on. But ask a few language learners about their experiences. Some of them find these questions to be actually helpful (which proves that questions themselves are not the actual problem), but there are many others who found that their learning methods are quite different. Learning a language involves a sense of leaping into the unknown, and is an act of courage. There are so many native speakers of that language out there, with their own literature and culture. The daily lives and experiences of so many people are associated with it, which could be very different from our own experiences. And yet we as an outsider may come across something so beautiful, that we may feel like giving a try to anything related to that language to realize those experiences. This may include translating something from that language to your own language, but there can be a million other ways. Many of those ways can be used if we take the process of learning that language in our own hands.

How about actually talking to a native speaker? Well, that is a similar method by which one can learn more, just like translating. But consider the scenario where it is said that whoever is not able to talk to a native speaker for 10 minutes straight (or similarly, is unable to translate a paragraph), would not be exposed to any literature in that language! It would be like hindering people to experience something which is inherently so beautiful. It is the beauty of that language expressed in literature (and other forms) which encourages people to engage with that language in the first place. It is something by which maybe someone previously uninterested in the language can become interested. How cruel is it of us to impose such a condition?

The reality is that such conditions are imposed mostly because of administrative factors and neglect. Administrative people associated with the language education are aware of limited language seats in the colleges, limited number of teachers, etc. Hence the questions are made to be as objective as they can be, so that there's one criteria to evaluate everyone (for example, translating or talking to a native speaker). Later, this may alter the job prospectives of those students, which is considered a very important factor in a country like ours. Slowly the talks about the joy of learning that language, the literature which has been written in it and fail to become a topic which are talked about among students. There are talks about which companies pay more to bilinguals or multilinguals, if it could be used in a CV, and so on, but not so much about if someone just wants to try learning it. This brings ‘shoulds’ into life - you should be bilingual to get that job, and so on. There is nothing inherently wrong here, but let us talk about a couple of problems first before we get back to this.
