---
layout: post
title: "Why a Science Club in a Science Institute?"
author: "Vatsal Trivedi"
---
## Resources in colleges

When students reach college they see a completely different environment than what they've experienced till then. Just to have an idea of what kind of resources are offered by a college, we tell a little bit about our own institute before initiating the discussion on the purpose of our club[^1]. UM-DAE CEBS is a small community, and the typical strength of a class (second year onwards) is 8-9 students. We have a very limited number of in-house faculty members. Most of the courses are taught by either superannuated or currently active researchers, who have been or are a part of leading research and academic institutes of Mumbai like BARC, TIFR, IITB, HBCSE and NIRRH. Our professors encourage asking doubts, include historical as well as recent developments of the subject, and give glimpses of how the knowledge can be applied in research.

There are some opportunities especially offered by CEBS[^2]. Because of the small batch strength, teachers can pay attention to each student and can clarify their doubts. In the absence of a crowd, students can also be more comfortable with the teacher and the subject, and can interact without much hesitation. Typically it is upon the instructor to decide how they want to cover the subject matter, though a general guideline of the courses does exist. This means that there is no compulsion to finish the syllabus, and everyone can try to clear up their doubts thoroughly before the class proceeds further. Since most professors come from different institutes and many of them are active researchers themselves, students also get to know the research environment of various fields and institutes in a better manner. Such an environment can motivate students to study the subject matter in the most original manner.

## Childhood background

However, each student is different and has their own set of experiences. These include not just related to their academics during their stay at the centre, but a wider range of incidents since their childhood which have shaped their surroundings and outlook. Unless we acknowledge their background and the problems they face, and strengthen them, the opportunities offered by the colleges as mentioned earlier do not have much meaning on their own and could go unused. Let us go beyond the standard facts associated with the academic structure of colleges (including that of CEBS), and instead inspect the fabric from the students’ point of view.

Before joining the institute the students have already seen the environment of school (and often coaching classes also). There, a lot of emphasis is given on solving questions to get the correct answer. Questions can serve as a great method to learn a concept, because then one can put together different ideas learnt in the chapter to find an answer to something. Many professors say that they ask their students to try solving as many questions as possible. So questions themselves may not be a problem. But our over-reliance on them to evaluate everyone can be a problem. Let us observe this in the case of language courses, where it is slightly more evident.

Suppose it is asked to translate a given sentence into another language. These sorts of questions are very common to ask in language exams. It'll definitely provide the student with an opportunity to practice the vocabulary, the correct use of prepositions and cases, and so on. But ask a few language learners about their experiences. Some of them find these questions to be actually helpful (which proves that questions themselves are not the actual problem), but there are many others who have found that their learning methods are quite different. Learning a language involves a sense of leaping into the unknown. There are so many native speakers of that language out there, with their own culture and understanding of the world. The daily lives and experiences of so many people are associated with it, which could be very different from our own experiences. And yet we as an outsider may come across something so beautiful[^3], that we may feel like giving a try to anything related to that language in order to live and realize those experiences. This may include translating something from that language, but there can be a million other ways. Many of those ways can be used in synergy if we take the process of learning that language in our own hands.

How about actually talking to a native speaker? Well, that is a similar method by which one can learn more, just like translating. But consider the scenario where it is said that whoever is not able to talk to a native speaker for 10 minutes straight (or similarly, is unable to translate a paragraph), would not be exposed to any literature in that language! It would be like hindering people to experience something which is inherently so beautiful[^4]. It is the beauty of that language expressed in literature (and other forms) which encourages people to engage with that language in the first place. It is something by which maybe someone previously uninterested in the language can become interested. How cruel is it of us to impose such conditions?

The reality is that such conditions are imposed mostly because of administrative factors and associated neglect. Some people associated with the administration of language education are aware of limited seats in the colleges, limited number of teachers, etc. Hence the questions are made to be as objective as they can be, so that there's one criteria to evaluate everyone (for example, translating or talking to a native speaker, with only one answer being correct in any method). Later, this may alter the job prospectives of those students, which is a very important factor in a country like ours. Many others associated with language education who have themselves experienced the same system in their childhood are oblivious to this reality and thereby ignore its effects on the students. Slowly the joy of learning that language, the literature which has been written in it, etc. fail to become topics of interest among students. There are talks about which companies pay more to multilinguals, if it could be used in a CV, and so on, but not so much about if someone just wants to try learning it (“How do I understand this couplet by Rumi/Kalidasa?”). This brings ‘shoulds’ into one’s life - one should be multilingual to get that job, and so on. There is again nothing inherently wrong in becoming multilingual to get a job, but let us talk about a couple of problems first before we get back to this.

## Availability of resources

If a student comes across a different school, teacher or coaching institute where the answers to these questions (that is, the ones asked in exams) are explained better, the students would realize that the previous school, coaching or teacher were not as good. This will also increase their chance to get good grades and hence the possibility of getting a job which pays more. Thus, not explaining the answers of the questions properly is the first and the apparent problem. Maybe the teachers in the previous place didn’t really understand their subject and made stories, or any other reason[^5]. This is why people search for better schools and teachers in terms of how successful they are in securing seats for students in colleges. With time the administrators usually introduce more topics in the syllabus and one is required to master certain techniques in a limited amount of time to score more. Though presented in the disguise of a method by which students can learn more, these questions often overwhelm the chapter with themselves. There would be some students though, who would still take some message home from the chapter.

## The Unknown

But there is a larger problem which cannot be solved by those schools or coaching institutes which have proven themselves to be better than others in securing seats in colleges etc. This is primarily because of the nature of the problem, it consists of something very subjective yet lying at the core of education. In real life, although we can have some idea of which resources to use and which directions we can go in, there is always some uncertainty about how things will turn out. One can not have a pre-planned, completely foolproof trajectory for driving a car. There are far too many variables to be taken into account, and one needs to keep their senses open to make use of new opportunities as they come. But still we do see people around us who can drive well. Of course, knowing how to use brakes and accelerators is useful, but driving is not just about using these things separately. It’s a synergy of many such techniques developed over time by using them in different circumstances. If we are interested in learning it, someone who already knows how to drive[^6] can guide us. Then we can try to drive for some time and improvise and make those techniques our own. Driving a car is a real world problem, and if someone wishes to train others in this they need to show confidence in them and recognize and provide exactly the help they need. Compare it with “if you’re unable to turn the car in the radius of 2 m, we won’t let you drive in the city.[^7]”

Thus the second problem is that the students are made to believe that there are ‘proper’ answers and methods to solve any question, because there are ‘proper’ questions. That everything is (or should be) always sorted for them. “What exactly do they want from me? Oh, I need to turn the car in 2 m radius?”[^8] If we notice the nature of our actions of this type, we find that they were something we were supposed to do. On the other hand, if there’s something we want to do, a certain sense of incompleteness also accompanies the idea. There is a want which leads to original creations we see around us - creations which are beautiful and often also important. We all have experienced that things are always very messy. It’s not clear how to arrange the furniture in our room, we can try out different arrangements and see what gives us a ‘feel’; we can also take inputs from others around us. But it all starts from the question whether we want to make the room tidy? If not then making the room tidy becomes a routine job. It is this unknown feel which attracts us to do or learn something in the first place[^9].

After a chapter, students are usually asked to answer some questions. But actually none of those questions have been asked by the author of that story! The point of the story was never to ask questions after it (or at least I have never read one). It is to convey profound ideas and experiences which expand our view of the world, which “makes our life in harmony with all existence”, as Tagore puts it. Better resources can help us with answering those questions in a manner which suits ‘the’ correct way. But they may not help us in facing the vulnerabilities when we are trying to create[^10] something. For someone to help students recognize what goes in the creation of something, our teacher, school or book must be truthful to themself, a requirement which can be fulfilled only if someone wishes to do so.

When a discovery is made, it comes as a new perspective, a clarity out of the mess of data, like a tidy room. There’s no ‘the’ tidy room, it’s very subjective what someone considers beautiful. Similarly, in 'The last leaf' I particularly experienced how an act of true love can give hope to a dying person. I could only imagine what could have gone into the mind of the old man, who took the initiative to paint a leaf in the storm. But there can be someone to whom something else striked, a very different aspect than what appealed to me! However, because of our existing academic system, both of us are asked to explain the relevance of the title with the proper use of black and blue pen. Not that doing the latter is not good - far from it. How wonderful an opportunity it would be for someone willing to write about the title, and their knowledge and love for artistic writing might only add to its beauty. The person can utilize this opportunity since this is something they would like to do. But here's where the subjectivity lies, and the author of the story rightly respected it. That’s why he didn’t ask us these questions, he just took the initiative to express what he found beautiful in his exploration. Now it is upon us to recognize what we want to find and express regarding a particular aspect of that story. Maybe some don’t feel like doing anything with the title or even any part of the story, so be it! It’s not possible to live without being involved in any actions, so people can ask themselves what else they would like to do at the moment. But if we (passively and repeatedly) try to assign our goal as something recognized by others as a goal worth achieving (like answering questions after a story), we tend to not deviate from our existing path even if we get hints that we would like to do something else.

Constance Garnett was a 19th century translator who translated a large part of Russian literature (especially Chekhov’s and Dostoevsky’s works) into English. She wrote in not so good handwriting, often skipped sentences she couldn’t understand, and she could never speak in Russian! But her works help even today’s English readers to read the works of those Russian writers. I’m not aware if anyone told her that she should do it (even in the name of responsibility), or that she should first know the various verbs required for the translation. She just felt a need to translate it and then figured out all that.

Such a translation is not a multiple choice question. It is not just a matter of time that if one follows the syllabus properly then they’ll be able to do it well, it’s very much a matter of interest. There is no syllabus someone else has set, and no evaluation by someone else. Everything is in our hands, from taking the initiative, to figuring out and implementing the plan, and then improvising upon it to come up with the translation. It’s difficult and exciting at the same time! One of the most striking things I learnt while doing a project was that a piece of the instrument was missing. Nowhere in the classroom syllabi I had seen mentioned that a certain piece of an instrument could be missing while setting up an experiment! There was no correct choice of company, I had to weigh which one is better in terms of quality and money.

By being evaluated over pre-designed, well-formed questions, and taking into account the fact that evaluation by others often overwhelms education of students in our academic system, following notions have become wide-spread[^11]:
1. The real world objects are disconnected from one another (just like topics in a syllabus),
2. People will always be setting up not just problems for us but also ‘the’ correct way of solving them (and if they don't then it’s not a good place to be in),
3. Undue credit, in terms of academic or job opportunities and suchlike, will always be given to those who performed well in these exams, and
4. Due credit will never be given to those who believe in their subjective interests and try to explore things independently.


## Unknown in Science

Very similar are the perceptions of students about Science. Just as there are resources in language learning which can be directed to fulfil a certain requirement (for example, which guarantee a certain level of proficiency), there are resources in Science education which seem to guarantee that they can help ‘crack’ (aka hack) a particular exam. In our contemporary education system we see many of these being given disproportionate importance, so much so that being educated has become synonymous with cracking these exams. But we have just discussed what actually these kinds of exams contain, and what notions someone ‘cracking’ them could have.

Just as there’s only one ‘The Last Leaf’ that has been written, there’s (probably) only one earth that we live in, only one sun, etc. And just as our perception about the story can differ, our perception about natural phenomena and their description can also differ. “Acceleration due to gravity on earth is 9.8 m/s2, irrespective of the caste, colour, gender, religion etc of the experimentalist”, said a professor once. This is very true in the sense that people have been and still are discriminated against on these grounds, and the professor rightly wanted to help them. We hear similar arguments in many other contexts in Science, but sometimes people take it to such extremes (either deliberately or ignorantly) that it may give a perception of completeness. As if the ‘lower levels’ of understanding that phenomena are completely polished, and only ‘higher level’ problems are remaining, “which I will be able to access with time if I follow these lower level descriptions properly”.

Something we have learnt being at CEBS is - there’s no such thing as a complete, absolute description. Maybe the amount of heavy metals inside the earth is not uniform spatially, maybe the currents of molten metals inside it have a time-dependent effect on the value of g on the surface, maybe there's no such thing as a force of gravity, maybe something else which no one has found yet (I am making stories now, but why not!). Not that trying to access the ‘higher level’ problems is inherently bad, but they’re accessed with even more excitement if we acknowledge our (and everyone else’s) incomplete understanding of these ‘basic’ concepts[^12]. And similarly in other natural phenomena - a nail made up of only iron atoms won’t rust even in the presence of air and moisture, there must be a few copper atoms in it to cause rusting[^13]. There’s always another level of detail, possibly more fundamental and which could be unseen by everybody![^14] I’ve seen textbooks claiming and people adamantly believing that “speed of light is a constant in vacuum” means “it does not depend upon the speed of the source.” But even the speed of sound does not depend upon the speed of the source! Many times such discussions are not very important to solve numerical problems in exams. We can indeed try to do something that interests us and which requires this ‘basic’ understanding (being able to manipulate equations, for example). But it’s upon us (whoever we are, a student, a faculty, or anyone) to realize and acknowledge our incomplete knowledge and genuine questions about these basic things. This issue has much more significance than the lack of resources themselves, since then even if the resources are available they would not be used well.

Had the evaluation questions been designed only to assist students in their process of learning and not for any administrative purpose (or at least if the students knew that this is not the case at present), many of them could have helped themselves. Then they would better acknowledge the messiness of the reality associated with each concept and how closely it could be associated with other concepts. On top of that, if they are helped and encouraged to recognize and pursue their own interests, they can find their own ways to support themselves and their loved ones. One can argue if sprinting is the only way for students to secure their seats in colleges or for higher studies, since that's the criteria that has been set in front of them presently. But to know what to do there and how to use those resources, is not told by such sprints. There have been students who got the opportunity to study in the best colleges of the country, and yet the thought of sprinting could not leave their mind. “Students take degrees in chemical engineering and then work in commerce companies”, said a friend. There’s nothing inherently wrong in it, but doing it because that’s what society has presented to them as ‘better’, and not as part of their independent exploration, only serves to illustrate the point we have talked about so far.

## Environment at college campus

And thus, before the students come to the institute they have already formed notions about what kind of education they need to get, how are they going to spend their time in the college, and so on. We have a real life scenario now. Now there aren’t just students with generalized behaviour engaging with the generalized environment of the institute. It may be a fourth semester student in the biology stream interacting with a faculty member in the classroom. Or, maybe the student is interacting with a sixth semester student of the physics stream, not necessarily about either of the disciplines. Maybe the interaction is with a group in a sports meet, or the student has recently come across a research paper or a book. Maybe there’s an assignment or a project that’s due. These kinds of interactions and circumstances form a very large part of their experiences at the centre, and are indeed the background in which the opportunities offered by the institute need to function. To a large extent they build the knowledge and the outlook of the students, which also manifests itself in their work as researchers. So in order to realize the motive of the institute, it is necessary to inspect these interactions in further detail in the light of the background as discussed in the previous sections.

There are students who carry their expectations or regrets as to whether they should have joined another stream, or an engineering or medical college instead. People talk about their plans after the course (such as where they would like to join for a PhD), and the requirements to attain them (such as grades and recommendations). Many had spent their school days under ‘pressure’ to join a college, and students feel relieved when they join the centre. Other than the misconceptions, outright lies are also quite widespread, such as promoting mediocrity in the name of ‘interaction with seniors’[^15]. Students may start feeling as if there are certain goals others have set for them which they need to fulfill, which starts a rat race. Independently exploring what they want and bringing harmony in their life can sound more philosophical than realistic to them. In the presence of such factors all the opportunities mentioned earlier take a back seat, and people are tempted to bargain time[^16]. It is possible that students take for granted the opportunities presented before them by the institute (or anybody in that case). And thus one can learn a number of name reactions in class and the techniques to know which organic product will be formed in larger quantities, and still be unwilling to form a product in the lab if it is not a course work requirement[^17]. This is despite the availability of the chemicals and equipment, which is a challenge in itself in a country like ours. Let alone using that knowledge to form something either scientifically interesting or useful for societal application.

In the spirit of bargaining time, one can consider things to be a one-time event. “You just need to get admission in XYZ college and everything will be all set afterwards”[^18]. There are no one-time events which ascertain everything will go happily (or sadly) afterwards, but because of our short-sighted human nature we still wish so. We long for guarantees, and bet on anything which gives us those. But we see time and again that no event guarantees indefinite happiness or sadness; as soon as we open our eyes to other aspects in our life, we again find ourselves drifting in a sea[^19]. So the plans like “first I’ll crack X exam, then go to Y college, then become Z” usually ignore the fact that any moment can be significant in people’s life, and they can’t pinpoint a priori which one it will be.

We had earlier discussed the general outlook of many of our professors. But it is not the same with every faculty member. Students of the past become faculty members of today, and their recruitment procedure could have similar problems as what the entrance exams taken by students had. Their experiences as students, researchers and faculty would reflect on their teaching objectives also. Some teachers can have a very adverse effect on the experiences of the students towards the subject, since they might have never enjoyed their subject but still are where they are because it might be ‘told’ to them that that is right. The problems we talked about in the case of school education could continue after coming to college. They are often not as gruesome as they are in the school, especially in CEBS because most (but not all) faculty members do enjoy learning and teaching. But the students sense the effects of these problems on themselves more, since now they have more freedom and can actively form opinions about where their time goes.

## Specific problems

It is then that we come to more relatable situations and problems. This includes discriminating against people on the basis of their gender, culture, financial status, appearance, grades or something else. In the spirit of bargaining time, some students can (deliberately or unknowingly) cause harm to others in their ‘free time’ because it would be ‘fun’. This has partly to do with their childhood, partly with the culture they have experienced at the institute, and partly due to them not doing what they think is right (and not just/necessarily logical). Taking an extreme stand is easier, but the detailed nature of the reality we talked about was not just related to the concepts in books. It is also related to our everyday behaviour, what we do, what we speak, what we believe in. So although one can say everything is good or bad with the institute, such beliefs don’t help anyone (especially the believer). But people do take such extreme stands - partly because of vested interests and partly because they’ve been kept in the dark by people around them. The latter reason is more fundamental and can be addressed. We are trying to write about some specific issues and their possible solutions in another article, which are a repercussion of the larger problems discussed so far. People need support, and if they don’t get it from within they start seeking it in other things or activities. They can try to get lost in a fake world for some time to escape from their problems and insecurities, in which the notion of bargaining of time is inherent. It is in these circumstances that their immediate surroundings can play a vital role in providing them the kind of support they need.

This is all with people who do manage to cross these exams and get into colleges. We have not yet touched upon the problems faced by the rest, who are the majority. Imagine from the perspective of a girl who has faced a suppressing environment throughout her life. Even when she starts something on her own she's pushed down by everyone. Can we change something?

## The First Step

Building and maintaining the spirit of the institute is far from being a one-time event. The factors as mentioned may accumulate and adversely affect the behavior and experiences of the students at the centre. So it becomes essential to reflect upon these issues and try to find their solutions. We can attempt to solve these issues at both administrative and community level. We wouldn’t comment here on how progress can be made at the administrative end[^20], but let us talk about what can be done at the community level.

Every piece of (academic or otherwise) information that is presented before us has a lot of background, and always has a certain amount of uncertainty attached to it. There may also be some parts of it which we may find interesting. Though the teacher, classroom and syllabus for a course are the same for all the students, the perception all of them have of the concept is very different and necessarily incomplete. We can use that information to try to understand something more, while retaining the humility and interest we have got from our incomplete knowledge. This is why we need to (be enabled to) question the ‘basics’. We can also try to have some understanding of what is not correct around the topic that is being presented as correct. So the first thing that we can do is to try to leap into the unknown, despite all the things that are demanded from us, despite all our temptations to get lost in a fake world for some transient amount of time. We can try to identify and follow our genuine curiosity regardless of all the fancy ideas the world has planted before us.

By taking the initiative of leaping into something unknown, something unclear and interesting to us, we get lost again but in the real world this time. By being lost in the real world one doesn't feel as unsafe, one feels enabled. So whatever we would be interested in doing, we can try to take things in our hands and attempt to bring tidiness out of the messy situation[^21]. Not that doing it is easy - it’s not easy to write stories like Godaan, especially when you’ve run out of all your money, when you know many people won’t read it ever, when no one has set any template for you, when there are deadlines for other things, the list just continues. Why would you still follow your interest? There’s no logical reason and no apparent benefit. But put yourself in the writer’s position and you understand the surroundings around him. Maybe he felt he could try to solve some of the problems of his time by expressing his experiences and understanding of life in the form of a story; that might have been an initial idea. After writing some part of it he may have had more ideas, more directions to go in. And it's as if he’s being pulled into this endeavour, despite all the hustle and bustle going around him.

There are many ‘shoulds’ which have been put in front of us, and we have our own interests and (yet to be found) curiosities on the other hand. Because of our dynamic interests and unique history, each of us is living a different life. We need to acknowledge our unique history and our incomplete knowledge about how the world works, and try to not expect absolute resources (of knowledge) either. And when we are not in such a ‘phase’ of independent exploration, we can try to think if any kind of exploitation[^22] is really in our favour. Working it out could bring a certain kind of harmony in our (perception of the) world[^23]. This is a completely selfish step, in the sense that we ourselves need to detoxify ourselves and try to understand our place in the world.

In reality, it takes a lot of time to have some understanding of the subject[^24]. One of our professors who is also a renowned scientist told us once, "What I used to think of the subject 10 years back was very flawed at so many levels". The professor was 70 at the time he told that, which means he had already been in the field for about 40-50 years. There are others who become interested in classical mechanics only after coming across Noether's theorems or introductory quantum mechanics, none of which is taught in the school. One may not have got an opportunity to have an interaction with practitioners of the field, who have much more detailed perspectives of natural phenomena than what the syllabus usually demands. If we wish to help someone or improve something then we can try to inculcate our selfish strategy in our behaviour with others. When it comes to teaching and learning, we can try to acknowledge the uniqueness not only in the background of the person (or in the description of a phenomenon) but also in their future. It is the future which holds the different understanding we will build with time about others or about a phenomenon. We can take things in our hands to identify and explore our curiosity.

## Steps in action

Teachers who have themselves leaped into the unknown, who have vast knowledge of their subject, can pick from their experience and preference which all points they would like to introduce to the students initially (though they also learn it with time). This means that if a student, because of their unique background, comes across something unexpected, and asks them to elaborate, the teachers would have something to tell. And in cases where they don’t, then they acknowledge it, which only serves to boost the confidence of the student to take the investigation in their own hands! Compare it with someone (a fellow student, faculty or anyone else) who is adamant that everyone should confirm to the beliefs they or a book has (even about the basics), or puts the questioner down mocking their lack of familiarity with the subject. This usually stems from the lack of self-exploration[^25] (and resultant lack of interest) in the subject, and results in the student facing problems as we discussed in the earlier sections.

We cannot change anyone’s behavior, only the person can. Penalizing people doesn’t help much, both for the people and for the rest of the institute, and it is also a kind of ‘one-time solution’. One thing we can try to do is introduce to them the harmony we have ourselves experienced in different contexts of our lives. And we’ll do it unconsciously if we explore things we are genuinely interested in. So there’s actually no dichotomy here. We may not be able to design trajectories for everyone, but we can still be together while being alone. It makes our individual journey less scary. For this the community needs to be brought closer together. The existing evaluation system, the prevalent social order, the discrimination and mockery people face, all of it keeps shattering people from within. They need support, they need help, they need love. And so do we. There's no difference between them and us. We are all connected to each other and objects around us in an infinite number of ways.

## CBS Science Club

Though it may sound essential to acknowledge these problems, it can also be exciting to do so! And to address them can be even more exciting! This is because doing something for the community is a messy problem which interests us, with a lot of scope for improvisation. There's just so much that's unknown - why exactly do we want to contribute to a community, how will we do that, how to coordinate with like-minded people, what are the frontiers here. Of course, what is exciting for an individual is very context dependent, but still there are times when we end up creating things together. We want an integrated community which supports its people and makes them feel safe and enabled in their individual exploration. We want to experience this as students of science, to have honest conversations about a topic without fearing constantly about our evaluation, discrimination or anything else. Everyone can contribute to building such an environment in their own ways, but we’ll talk about ourselves now.

We[^26] are volunteers from various streams and batches of the institute, and the motive of all our events is to build the same kind of environment we talked about. In Rendezvous, for instance, we invite researchers and students so that they can have free conversations centred around a particular scientific topic. When we invited[^27] Prof. Rama Govindarajan from ICTS, Bengaluru to speak with us, we talked about how we can try to predict weather using computer simulations and equations, and then the discussion went around many adjacent questions. The key point was that we aimed for the discussion to be realistic. We wanted to get introduced to the field, understand what the problems are and how and to what extent her group has tackled them. And whenever there was something which didn't fit someone's picture of the story, we tried to discuss that doubt (though certainly there would be many loopholes in implementing our ideas). We wanted to have the session with her because at least some of us were curious to do so! Many things were unknown during the session - the problems, the methods, the solutions, the subsequent questions, how everyone presents their part, and so on. There's nothing which is absolutely correct here, every statement comes with its own uncertainties and possibilities of further exploration and discussion. And thus there’s no hurriedness of finishing it quickly and moving on to something else. On the other hand, we have already seen the problems when we falsely give people the notion of correct answers - it brings with it the notions of boredom of journey (and hence closing our eyes while travelling) and the hurriedness to reach ‘the’ destination.

This is indeed why we have a science club in a science institute. We volunteers wish to explore our unknown paths of learning and communicating (science) while feeling safe and enabled, and we wish to provide just that environment to others around us. Our common interests provide us with an opportunity to explore and create things which might be used for collective purposes (organizing a Rendezvous session, for example).


[^1]:  In case you are familiar with the academics at CEBS, kindly move on to the next section.

[^2]:  Other colleges can similarly have their own living and learning environments to offer to the students.

[^3]: For the time being, let us consider that what is beautiful also has harmony (description by Premchand). A beautiful painting has harmony of colours and a beautiful song has harmony of sounds.

[^4]: Very similar is the case with any other subject. “If you can’t play C minor, we won’t let you listen to Beethoven’s compositions” becomes the spirit.

[^5]: Link PG’s blog, ‘Why Nerds are Unpopular’

[^6]:  Though we may think they have learnt driving, do they also feel the same way? Are there people who feel there are aspects about their driving where they can improve?

[^7]:  It reminds me of the evaluation procedure in reality shows.

[^8]:  Though we are tempted to be hateful here for those learners, we need to pause and think. Sometimes things are a bit too sorted, so much so that they may give the illusion to believe that everything should go like the way they ‘should’ go. As Peter Thiel expresses his apprehensiveness about ex-googlers starting a start-up, he says that Google is too set up and many people there don’t know what it means to start things from scratch. And there can be many other issues.

[^9]:  When is a ‘should’ unavoidable?

[^10]:  How many essays that students write in typical exams end up in textbooks? How many of them go on to like reading and writing essays? Similarly, how many essayists whose essays we read in textbooks wrote them for an exam?

[^11]: We are yet to fact-check the reality of these notions

[^12]:  Not to say that if we keep believing that basic descriptions are complete, then after reaching a frontier question while doing a project etc we would face the real world challenges for the first time. Since we wouldn’t be accustomed to that sort of thing, we might not like it.

[^13]: Here we can ask something we probably didn’t ask in our school days - how does rusting actually occur?

[^14]: The present article is no exception to that.

[^15]: This article is currently being written

[^16]: Also called ‘managing time’, but ‘managing' has positive connotations. Managing does not involve the neglect of independent exploration.

[^17]: Indeed, most students who score well in organic chemistry in coachings do not end up doing anything related to organic chemistry. It is instead treated as a ladder to go somewhere (socially regarded) higher.

[^18]: It happens in many other contexts. “You just need to get X job or marry Y person.”

[^19]: “...लेकिन उसके चेहरे पर आनंद-विकास की जगह भविष्य की शंका झलक रही थी, जैसे कोई विद्यार्थी परीक्षा में उत्तीर्ण होने के बाद चिंता में ग्रस्त हो जाता है। उसे अनुभव होता है कि वह बाँध जो संसार रुपी नदी की बाढ़ से मुझे बचाए हुए था, टूट गया है और मैं अथाह सागर में खड़ा हूँ।” - Sevasadan

[^20]: We are currently in the process of writing it.

[^21]: How exactly? Try something yourself.

[^22]: Link it to our blog on misogyny

[^23]: But even this is unknown if that ‘harmony’ will come or not; it isn’t in our hands. We are completely alone in the dark, there’s no apparent benefit from this exploration. What leads us to still explore something? What leads you to explore something?

[^24]: Would you still spend your time on your interest? Would you not bargain time now?

[^25]: There could be several reasons for it, and it is always better if we are not hateful to anybody. Whatever we do, we need to make sure we as well as everyone has had unique pasts and will have unique futures, and acknowledge the conditions under which our inferences would hold true.

[^26]: But who exactly is 'we'? The final thing the audience sees from the club is a superposition of thoughts and actions of many different people. We are currently in the process of writing about it.

[^27]:  Link it
